README.md, before:

# Talos Docker Compose Setup

This directory contains the Docker Compose configuration for bootstrapping a Talos Kubernetes cluster using PXE boot.

## Container Overview

The setup consists of three Docker containers, each with a specific role:

1. **matchbox**: Serves as the PXE boot server and configuration generator
   - Downloads Talos OS kernel and initramfs
   - Generates Talos configurations for each node
   - Serves configurations over HTTP on port 8080
   - Automatically configures node-specific settings based on network-config.yaml

2. **matchbox-tftp**: Provides TFTP services for network booting
   - Implements PXE boot protocol over UDP port 69
   - Serves boot files to nodes during PXE boot process
   - Routes nodes to the appropriate configuration based on their MAC address

3. **talos-bootstrap**: Bootstraps and initializes the Talos Kubernetes cluster
   - Verifies connectivity to control plane nodes
   - Executes the cluster bootstrap process
   - Generates the kubeconfig file
   - Exports configuration files to host for easy access
   - Maps both ~/.kube and ~/.talos directories to provide access to configs

## Environment Variables

The Docker Compose setup uses environment variables to configure the Talos cluster. These variables can be set in a `.env` file in this directory. A sample `.env.example` file is provided as a template.

### Setting Up Environment Variables

1. Copy the example file to create your own `.env` file:
   ```bash
   cp .env.example .env
   ```

2. Edit the `.env` file to set your specific values:
   ```bash
   # Update with your actual values
   PROD_NAME=cluster.example.com
   PROD_ENDPOINT=https://api.cluster.example.com:6443
   # ... other variables
   ```

### Available Environment Variables

| Variable | Description | Example Value |
|----------|-------------|---------------|
| `GITHUB_REPO` | GitHub repository for network config | https://github.com/yourusername/talos |
| `FORCE_REGENERATE` | Whether to regenerate existing configs | false |
| `PROD_VIP` | VIP for the Kubernetes API | 192.168.1.100 |
| `PROD_NAME` | Kubernetes cluster name | cluster.example.com |
| `PROD_ENDPOINT` | Kubernetes API endpoint | https://api.cluster.example.com:6443 |
| `PROD_DNS_DOMAIN` | Kubernetes DNS domain | cluster.local |
| `PROD_POD_SUBNET` | Kubernetes pod subnet | 10.244.0.0/16 |
| `PROD_SERVICE_SUBNET` | Kubernetes service subnet | 10.96.0.0/12 |
| `TALOS_VERSION` | Talos version to use | https://pxe.factory.talos.dev/pxe/latest/metal-amd64 |
| `WIPE_DISK` | Whether to wipe disks during install | true |
| `MATCHBOX_HOST` | Hostname for the matchbox server | matchbox.lan |

## DNS Configuration

Before starting the Docker Compose setup, ensure your DNS is properly configured:

1. Set up DNS entries for:
   - `api.cluster.example.com` → `PROD_VIP`
   - `matchbox.lan` → IP of the host running the matchbox container
   - Optionally, a wildcard entry `*.cluster.example.com` → `PROD_VIP`

## Starting the Services

To start the services:

```bash
docker-compose up -d
```

This will start the matchbox and matchbox-tftp services, which will:
1. Download the Talos kernel and initramfs
2. Generate Talos configurations for each node
3. Set up TFTP for PXE booting

## Security Note

The `.env` file contains sensitive information and is excluded from git in the `.gitignore` file. Do not commit this file to your repository.

## Network Configuration

The Talos nodes are configured with three separate network interfaces:

1. **Primary Network (PRIMARY_NETWORK_CIDR)**
   - Connected to bus path `0000:00:03.0`
   - This is the only network with a gateway
   - Used for external connectivity and Kubernetes API access
   - VIP for control plane is configured on this network

2. **Secondary Network (SECONDARY_NETWORK_CIDR)**
   - Connected to bus path `0000:00:04.0`
   - No gateway configured
   - Used for internal cluster communication

3. **Tertiary Network (TERTIARY_NETWORK_CIDR)**
   - Connected to bus path `0000:00:05.0`
   - No gateway configured
   - Used for additional services or management

### DHCP Configuration

For proper routing, the DHCP server should be configured to:
- Provide a gateway only on the primary network
- Not provide gateways on the secondary and tertiary networks

This ensures all external traffic is routed through the primary network interface.

The network configuration is automatically generated by the `generate-configs.sh` script, which creates the appropriate interface configuration for each node based on its bus path.

### Network Interface Mapping

| Bus Path | Physical Interface | Network Role | Purpose |
|---------|-------------------|---------|---------|
| 0000:00:03.0 | ens3 | PRIMARY_NETWORK_CIDR | Primary network with VIP |
| 0000:00:04.0 | ens4 | SECONDARY_NETWORK_CIDR | Secondary network |
| 0000:00:05.0 | ens5 | TERTIARY_NETWORK_CIDR | Tertiary network |

This mapping is tracked in the `network-config.template.yaml` file to avoid confusion.

## Scripts Overview

The Docker containers use two main scripts to automate the Talos cluster lifecycle:

1. **bootstrap-cluster.sh**: Primary script to bootstrap the Talos cluster
   - Used by the talos-bootstrap container
   - Verifies node connectivity and health
   - Executes the bootstrap command and generates kubeconfig
   - Exports configuration files to host machine
   - Modified to ensure proper permissions on exported configs

2. **generate-configs.sh**: Generates Talos configurations for all nodes
   - Called by the matchbox container
   - Creates control plane and worker node configurations
   - Uses network-config.yaml as input
   - Outputs configurations to matchbox-data volume

## Using Talos and Kubernetes Configuration Files

After a successful Talos cluster bootstrap, the necessary configuration files are automatically exported to your host machine:

1. **Talos Configuration**: Located at `~/.talos/config`
   - Used by talosctl to interact with Talos nodes
   - Contains context information and authentication credentials
   - Use with: `talosctl --nodes=<node-name> status`

2. **Kubernetes Configuration**: Located at `~/.kube/config`
   - Used by kubectl to interact with the Kubernetes cluster
   - Contains endpoints and authentication information
   - Use with: `kubectl get nodes`

Both configuration files will have proper permissions (644) to be used directly from your host. No need to connect to the container to interact with your cluster.

Example commands:
```bash
# Check Talos node status
talosctl --nodes=prodcp1 status

# Check Kubernetes nodes
kubectl get nodes

# View Kubernetes pods
kubectl get pods -A
```

If you need to regenerate the kubeconfig, you can run:
```bash
docker-compose run --rm talos-bootstrap talosctl --nodes=<node-name> kubeconfig
```

Commit message:

Switch to using pre-built Docker Hub images

README.md, after:

# Talos Docker Compose Setup

This directory contains the Docker Compose configuration for bootstrapping a Talos Kubernetes cluster using PXE boot.

## Container Overview

The setup consists of three Docker containers, each with a specific role:

1. **matchbox**: Serves as the PXE boot server and configuration generator
   - Downloads Talos OS kernel and initramfs
   - Generates Talos configurations for each node
   - Serves configurations over HTTP on port 8080
   - Automatically configures node-specific settings based on network-config.yaml

2. **matchbox-tftp**: Provides TFTP services for network booting
   - Implements PXE boot protocol over UDP port 69
   - Serves boot files to nodes during PXE boot process
   - Routes nodes to the appropriate configuration based on their MAC address

3. **talos-bootstrap**: Bootstraps and initializes the Talos Kubernetes cluster
   - Verifies connectivity to control plane nodes
   - Executes the cluster bootstrap process
   - Generates the kubeconfig file
   - Exports configuration files to host for easy access
   - Maps both ~/.kube and ~/.talos directories to provide access to configs

## Environment Variables

The Docker Compose setup uses environment variables to configure the Talos cluster. These variables can be set in a `.env` file in this directory. A sample `.env.example` file is provided as a template.

### Setting Up Environment Variables

1. Copy the example file to create your own `.env` file:
   ```bash
   cp .env.example .env
   ```

2. Edit the `.env` file to set your specific values:
   ```bash
   # Update with your actual values
   PROD_NAME=cluster.example.com
   PROD_ENDPOINT=https://api.cluster.example.com:6443
   # ... other variables
   ```

### Available Environment Variables

| Variable | Description | Example Value |
|----------|-------------|---------------|
| `GITHUB_REPO` | GitHub repository for network config | https://github.com/yourusername/talos |
| `FORCE_REGENERATE` | Whether to regenerate existing configs | false |
| `PROD_VIP` | VIP for the Kubernetes API | 192.168.1.100 |
| `PROD_NAME` | Kubernetes cluster name | cluster.example.com |
| `PROD_ENDPOINT` | Kubernetes API endpoint | https://api.cluster.example.com:6443 |
| `PROD_DNS_DOMAIN` | Kubernetes DNS domain | cluster.local |
| `PROD_POD_SUBNET` | Kubernetes pod subnet | 10.244.0.0/16 |
| `PROD_SERVICE_SUBNET` | Kubernetes service subnet | 10.96.0.0/12 |
| `TALOS_VERSION` | Talos version to use | https://pxe.factory.talos.dev/pxe/latest/metal-amd64 |
| `WIPE_DISK` | Whether to wipe disks during install | true |
| `MATCHBOX_HOST` | Hostname for the matchbox server | matchbox.lan |

## DNS Configuration

Before starting the Docker Compose setup, ensure your DNS is properly configured:

1. Set up DNS entries for:
   - `api.cluster.example.com` → `PROD_VIP`
   - `matchbox.lan` → IP of the host running the matchbox container
   - Optionally, a wildcard entry `*.cluster.example.com` → `PROD_VIP`

## Starting the Services

To start the services:

```bash
docker-compose up -d
```

All required containers are available on Docker Hub:
- quinneyd/talos-matchbox:v1.9.0
- quinneyd/talos-matchbox-tftp:v1.9.0 
- quinneyd/talos-bootstrap:v1.9.0

The docker-compose file is pre-configured to use these images, so no local building is required.

When started, the services will:
1. Download the Talos kernel and initramfs
2. Generate Talos configurations for each node
3. Set up TFTP for PXE booting

## Security Note

The `.env` file contains sensitive information and is excluded from git in the `.gitignore` file. Do not commit this file to your repository.

## Network Configuration

The Talos nodes are configured with three separate network interfaces:

1. **Primary Network (PRIMARY_NETWORK_CIDR)**
   - Connected to bus path `0000:00:03.0`
   - This is the only network with a gateway
   - Used for external connectivity and Kubernetes API access
   - VIP for control plane is configured on this network

2. **Secondary Network (SECONDARY_NETWORK_CIDR)**
   - Connected to bus path `0000:00:04.0`
   - No gateway configured
   - Used for internal cluster communication

3. **Tertiary Network (TERTIARY_NETWORK_CIDR)**
   - Connected to bus path `0000:00:05.0`
   - No gateway configured
   - Used for additional services or management

### DHCP Configuration

For proper routing, the DHCP server should be configured to:
- Provide a gateway only on the primary network
- Not provide gateways on the secondary and tertiary networks

This ensures all external traffic is routed through the primary network interface.

The network configuration is automatically generated by the `generate-configs.sh` script, which creates the appropriate interface configuration for each node based on its bus path.

### Network Interface Mapping

| Bus Path | Physical Interface | Network Role | Purpose |
|---------|-------------------|---------|---------|
| 0000:00:03.0 | ens3 | PRIMARY_NETWORK_CIDR | Primary network with VIP |
| 0000:00:04.0 | ens4 | SECONDARY_NETWORK_CIDR | Secondary network |
| 0000:00:05.0 | ens5 | TERTIARY_NETWORK_CIDR | Tertiary network |

This mapping is tracked in the `network-config.template.yaml` file to avoid confusion.

## Scripts Overview

The Docker containers use two main scripts to automate the Talos cluster lifecycle:

1. **bootstrap-cluster.sh**: Primary script to bootstrap the Talos cluster
   - Used by the talos-bootstrap container
   - Verifies node connectivity and health
   - Executes the bootstrap command and generates kubeconfig
   - Exports configuration files to host machine
   - Modified to ensure proper permissions on exported configs

2. **generate-configs.sh**: Generates Talos configurations for all nodes
   - Called by the matchbox container
   - Creates control plane and worker node configurations
   - Uses network-config.yaml as input
   - Outputs configurations to matchbox-data volume

## Using Talos and Kubernetes Configuration Files

After a successful Talos cluster bootstrap, the necessary configuration files are automatically exported to your host machine:

1. **Talos Configuration**: Located at `~/.talos/config`
   - Used by talosctl to interact with Talos nodes
   - Contains context information and authentication credentials
   - Use with: `talosctl --nodes=<node-name> status`

2. **Kubernetes Configuration**: Located at `~/.kube/config`
   - Used by kubectl to interact with the Kubernetes cluster
   - Contains endpoints and authentication information
   - Use with: `kubectl get nodes`

Both configuration files will have proper permissions (644) to be used directly from your host. No need to connect to the container to interact with your cluster.

Example commands:
```bash
# Check Talos node status
talosctl --nodes=prodcp1 status

# Check Kubernetes nodes
kubectl get nodes

# View Kubernetes pods
kubectl get pods -A
```

If you need to regenerate the kubeconfig, you can run:
```bash
docker-compose run --rm talos-bootstrap talosctl --nodes=<node-name> kubeconfig
```
